---
title: The Post-Apocalypse Survival Machine Nerd Farm
date: 01/11/2012
modified: 14/04/2013
author: Ashlee Vance
categories: news
tags: hardware, open-source, ecology, farming
source_name: Bloomberg Businessweek
source_url: http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2012-11-01/the-post-apocalypse-survival-machine-nerd-farm
comments: false

Marcin Jakubowski sits cross-legged on the dirt floor of a round hut in Missouri
farm country, carefully making an open-faced mayo and cheddar sandwich. Inside
the hut there’s a bed, a small desk, a few plastic containers (including one for
food), and, occasionally, mice and snakes. It’s 104°F out and only slightly
cooler inside. There’s no fridge~, so just how the mayonnaise hasn’t spoiled is
something of a mystery. Jakubowski, who’s of average height and extremely fit,
wears khakis and a long-sleeve oxford shirt. “What we are doing here is
conducting a civilization reboot experiment,” he says. He carefully places
cheddar shreds on top of the mayo, squirts the works with Sriracha hot sauce in
a precise cross-hatch pattern, bites, chews. “It’s about sustainable living and
having open access to critical information and tools.”

Jakubowski’s hut anchors a 30-acre compound near Maysville, Mo., full of wooden
shacks, yurts, work sheds, flapping laundry, clucking chickens, and a
collection of black and strange-looking machinery. A dozen or so people in
their twenties, none of whom appears to have bathed in a while, wander around
or fiddle with the machines. Jakubowski has named the place Factor e Farm,
though the goal isn’t just the cultivation of crops. Rather, it’s to create a
completely self-sufficient community that produces not only its own food, but
also energy, tools, and raw materials for making those tools. Jakubowski’s
ultimate purpose is both to live off the grid and to teach others—whether out
of choice or necessity—how to do so too.

In 2007, Jakubowski began working on a minimum set of machines necessary to
sustain a modern civilization. It comprises bread ovens, aluminum smelters,
tractors, brick presses, and 46 others. Factor e Farm has already built 15 of
these devices, including a computer-controlled torch table that can cut
intricate patterns on metal with a jet of superheated ionized gas. Work will
com-mence soon on a cement mixer, a sawmill, and an industrial robot.


Most of Factor e Farm’s equipment runs on an in-house invention called a Power
Cube. It’s a black metal box about the size of an office copier, with a
27-horsepower engine that runs a hydraulic pump. The Power Cube’s engine can
drive the bulldozers; the pumps can power the table saws and other smaller,
stationary machines.

Jakubowski expects to have all 50 tools finished by 2015 and publishes progress
reports on the Open Source Ecology website. He shares the designs for all the
machines and produces how-to-make-it videos. He wants as many people as
possible to take a crack at improving the designs.

Fifty tools aren’t a hedge against the apocalypse, although if most of
civilization is wiped out, survivors with Factor e Farm plans may at least have
something to work with. What Jakubowski is trying to prove is that people can
live without the help of corporations. A few years ago, his attempts at utopia
kept being undermined by the costs of repairing his farm equipment. So he
decided to cut out the middleman and forge his own gear. “If you’re going to
try to build any kind of sustainable, model community, you find out quickly
that the tools you need break down and are expensive,” he says. “Without fixing
this situation, you’re always left conducting business as usual.”

After Factor e Farm completes its “Global Village Construction Set,” Jakubowski
expects communities around the globe to use these tools, spurring an explosion
of innovation as people take his tractors and drills and build even better
ones. Eventually, this virtuous circle will yield equipment rivaling that made
by market-leading corporations—a tractor that is 90 percent as good as a John
Deere at a fraction of the price. Showing up established corporations is
critical to Jakubowski, because, he says, they spend too much time obsessing
over patents, spending millions on commercials, and generally getting in the
way of progress. “We are calling our work the Open Source Economy,” he says.
“We can collaborate on the machines and publish everything openly. We can
reduce all of this competitive waste. You have to start somewhere.”
 
 
Factor e Farm is about an hour north of Kansas City, Mo. To get there, you turn
off a two-lane road onto a gravelly stretch that runs for about a mile before
hitting the commune’s dirt driveway, which after about 100 yards leads to the
main living and work areas. Jakubowski’s hut and two others form the heart of
the compound. Nearby is a large, open-air workshop and a pair of his larger
contraptions, a bulldozer and tractor that look like Mad Max’s take on a John
Deere.

Jakubowski, 40, came to the U.S. from Poland at age 10 with his family. He
graduated with honors from Princeton and later earned a doctorate in nuclear
fusion physics from the University of Wisconsin. But he soured on the idea of a
lifetime in academics. As he likes to say, he woke up one day to discover that
he was “useless.” A steady diet of Indian food, yoga, and meditation persuaded
him to take an active role in trying to solve the world’s less theoretical,
more immediate problems. So he headed to Maysville and paid $60,000 for his
plot of land.

For a few years, Jakubowski lived mostly alone. First, he built the hut. That
backbreaking work persuaded him to build a brick press. Next, he constructed a
workshop to make more tools, including the tractor. He posted videos on the Web
and gained a following of DIYers. Now and again, a couple people would show up
during the summer to help out, and they made huts alongside Jakubowski’s. That
changed in early 2011, when he was invited to give a lecture at a TED
(Technology, Entertainment and Design) conference.

In his [TED Talk](http://www.ted.com/talks/marcin_jakubowski.html), Jakubowski
took the stage in a khaki Mao suit and explained how he planted 100 trees in one
day, pressed 500 bricks “from the dirt beneath my feet,” also in one day, and
built a tractor in six. “If we can lower the barriers to farming, building,
manufacturing,” he said calmly, “then we can unleash just massive amounts of
human potential.” The goal, he said, is to create on one freely downloadable DVD
a “civilization starter kit.” He ended the talk and received TED’s customary
rapturous applause.

Since Jakubowski’s TED Talk was posted to YouTube in April 2011, it’s been
viewed by more than 1 million people, around 500 of whom agreed to donate $10 or
so a month to “subscribe” to the farm. The foundation of Mark Shuttleworth, a
billionaire South African technology entrepreneur, gave Jakubowski $360,000 to
pursue the work. The TED video even inspired a handful of hardy idealists to
make a pilgrimage to Missouri and help out on the Factor e Farm. Then a few more
showed up, some staying a week or two, some for months.  By August 2012, there
were 14 to 20 people staying on the farm at any one time, though it looked less
like a farm than an unhygienic encampment for overeducated misfits.
 
 
Factor e Farm has 400 fruit trees, although none produce fruit in any meaningful
quantity yet. A dilapidated greenhouse not far from the workshop has nothing but
weeds growing inside. As a result, almost all of the farm’s food and supplies
come from Wal-Mart and other stores in nearby towns. “We are going through major
growing pains,” Jakubowski explains. ˙

A curved dirt path runs from Jakubowski’s hut to the main workshop area. On
either side of the path are yurts and shacks with clotheslines strung between
them. An old toilet bowl is used for growing herbs; chickens and rabbits sit in
cages awaiting food. About 200 yards past the yurts is a larger structure
called the Hab Lab, which was built by a local carpenter as a barracks during
the post-TED Talk overflow. It’s easy to find from the smell.

Bedrooms line one side of the building and a kitchen and bathrooms take up most
of the other. Between them is a common area with a table, couches, and open
buckets of rotting waste that, in the historic Midwestern heat wave of 2012,
produce a sweet, gag-inducing stench that sticks to the lining of the nostrils.
In the kitchen, strips of flypaper, covered in dead bugs, dangle from the
ceiling. House chore schedules posted on the walls are largely ignored.

A half-dozen or so young Factor e farmhands live in the Hab Lab. Three came
from Greece as part of an agricultural education program and spend the majority
of their days watching cartoons online. What the Hab Lab lacks in plumbing, it
makes up for in Wi-Fi. No one’s wearing shirts. There’s no air conditioning,
and the straw stuffed into the mud walls for insulation doesn’t cool things
down much.

Vann Miller, 39, keeps his Maserati parked in front of the Hab Lab. He’s a
freelance software developer with homes in San Francisco, New Orleans, and now a
secluded hexagonal yurt at Factor e Farm, where he’s lived for about a month.
He stayed in the Hab Lab for a while but decided to build the yurt out of
insulation panels from Home Depot “It took me a week to clear the site with a
shovel and pickax,” says Miller. “I leveled it with gravel, which helps keep out
the water and the animals.”

Miller has a 100-foot power cable stretching from an outlet in an old living
area into his yurt, where a MacBook Air sits on a small, plastic table.  He says
his area of expertise—software coding practices that speed up project
development—should up the tempo of Factor e Farm’s tool-building. “I have been
holding orientation meetings and people seem to be adopting the
agile-development techniques well,” he says.

The drinking water had been drawn from a well on the property, but the well and
a filter couldn’t keep up with all the farm’s guests. “A couple of weeks ago, a
few people started getting sick,” says Marshall Hilton, 28, an engineer from
San Francisco. “We decided it might be the water and now don’t recommend that
people drink it,” he says.

As with the other Factor e dwellers, Hilton’s bathroom is a 5-gallon bucket. “I
am composting my own waste,” he says. “I line my bucket with about two inches
of subsoil. Every time I make a deposit, I cover it with organic matter. I have
my bucket in my yurt, and it’s sealed off. There are no bugs. Well, I mean,
there are a few bugs.”
 
 
As part of the ground rules for my visit to the farm in July, I agree to help a
squad of farmworkers build a set of rooms on the side of the Hab Lab. To really
appreciate what they’re doing here, went the pitch, I should work beside them.
So on the second morning of my visit I report for duty. The others never do.
“That’s typical,” says John Marlatt, a local retired carpenter who showed up to
lead the project. “The kids are always supposed to help, but usually they’re
all inside and don’t do anything unless Marcin rustles them up. Oh, and don’t
drink the water. Seriously. I mean it.”

The Hab Lab no-shows notwithstanding, there are some signs the farm may be
getting its act together. Gabrielle LeBlanc has just been hired as the
agriculture chief. She’s a 22-year-old from suburban Los Angeles who wears a
tie-dye dress and has a “hemp history week” sticker on her laptop. “I am used
to foraging for my food,” she says. “I enjoy being out with the birds and
bugs.” LeBlanc studied animal science at the University of California-Davis. A
couple days before my arrival, she had the farm pay $1,000 for a dairy cow
(plus $30 for delivery), which she has named Good Cow and now keeps on the farm
in a paddock enclosed by an electric fence. LeBlanc plans to get the greenhouse
back in order before next planting season and to plant some crops and dig a
pond. Hilton, one of the yurt-dwelling engineers, has been refining a DIY
compressed-earth brick press and is hopeful he can turn it into something the
farm can sell for $9,000 each. “The closest competitor is $45,000,” he says.

With his funding from the Shuttleworth Foundation and other organizations,
Jakubowski says he plans to move from a volunteer workforce to an established
team. He also wants to shift from a handful of haphazard projects taking place
to doing a dozen at one time. He acknowledges it may seem odd to have food and
building materials shuttled into a “self-sustaining” community from nearby
supermarket chains and Home Depot. “Right now, we depend on off-the-shelf
parts, but the point is we are building the machines we need for the next
phase,” Jakubowski says. “Soon, we’ll build the components of the machines and
then build the materials.”

By “build the materials,” Jakubowski means he would like to eventually extract
the elemental natural resources for his tools as well. “We have techniques for
aluminum extraction from clay,” he says. He wants to produce his own metal for
robots and computers. He even intends to build his own computer chips by
finding a supply of silicon and constructing a mini-semiconductor fabrication
plant.

The Factor e Farm may seem crude now but, Jakubowski emphasizes, it’s just one
node in the network he envisions. The answers will not all come from him or the
farm. Other people will improve the designs, and, in time, a “distributed
enterprise” will arise—a society in which the people have taken back control of
their technology and lowered the basic cost for existence by several orders of
magnitude. “That is the model for the next economy,” Jakubowski says. “By
open-sourcing the entire production system, you can increase innovation by a
hundredfold.” His rhetoric really soars when he begins to explain the “e” in
Factor e. According to the commune’s website, “e” stands for “ecology,
experiments, and exponents, evolving to freedom. E is a transcendental number.
It is the growth rate of any natural system. E is our existence.”

Marlatt, the retired carpenter, agrees that Jakubowski can come across as
eccentric, even delusional, but blames at least some of the farm’s disarray on
this summer’s brutal drought. He’s cautiously optimistic. “This is most
definitely a good idea,” Marlatt says. “America is in trouble, and the idea of
being energy-efficient and knowing how to survive and build things is the right
course.”

Come December, Jakubowski plans to start selling the brick presses and prove
that the farm can make a profit of $5,000 per day from one of its machines. In
the meantime, he’ll keep enduring the curious people who drive by the farm to
peek at the strange folks building the strange contraptions. As Jakubowski
tells the locals, “Look us up on the Internet. We are not thugs. We are trying
to build a new civilization.”
